Good day I'm Norman Wildberger today we're going
to have a look at one of the most interesting
objects in the history of mathematics the object
that we call the number pi because its origins
of course in antiquity and has had lots and lots
of interesting formulas associated to it today we
will have a look at some of these lovely formulas
and look at some records for calculating pi we are
in a series here where we're investigating
the logical foundations of mathematics and
in particular we're looking at the weaknesses of
modern pure mathematics and when we look at pi a
lot of these weaknesses become very evident there
are a lot of logical difficulties associated and
circulating around this idea of Pi so today we're
also going to have a look at some of these logical
difficulties and they start right off with
the main definition of what exactly is pi so
pi of course is associated to a circle which is an
object of great interest to the ancient Greeks one
of their two main tools for doing geometry one was
a straightedge the other was a compass so the line
and the circle were fundamental to the ancient
Greeks in terms of building up geometry the circle
a very beautiful object of course but still sort
of shrouded in mystery and some of the mystery
concerns these two fundamental formulas one for
the area of a circle of radius R and the other
for the circumference of the circle of radius R
so there's some number supposedly called pi which
is involved in both of these formulas the area is
pi times the radius squared the area inside the
circle and the circumference or the length of the
outside of the circle is two times pi times the
radius R these are important formulas of course
that primary school students high school students
learn unfortunately one really cannot call them
theorems or if one does call them theorems in
year 2012 one has to admit that they are more or
less proof less theorems they are theorems that do
not have proofs associated to them and you can
check out that claim very easily by looking in
standard textbooks and seeing if you can find
proofs of these formulas so why are there not
proofs well because it turns out that is rather
a sensitive and delicate issue to set up geometry
and analysis in order to be able to actually prove
these correctly so if you go the standard route
what you need is a prior theory of real numbers
you need a prior theory of Euclidian geometry
because we're all working in the Euclidean plane
then of course you need a careful definition of
what you mean by pi and then after that you have
to establish the formulas themselves so I claim
that this is nowhere done well one strategy is to
use one of those formulas to define pi perhaps in
a special case for example when R equals one
and then to prove the formula for general R
and to prove the other formula also that's a
very reasonable strategy so we can think of
PI as being defined essentially by an area or
as essentially by a circumference or a length
around a curve so for the PI R squared formula
for area what we're imagining is to subdivide
the circle into lots of little squares let's say
and we could calculate the areas of the squares
because we understand areas of squares presumably
and we need a kind of limiting process because of
course the squares don't fill up the circle and we
have to keep subdividing it to smaller and smaller
squares and some limiting process to define the
area is required so we really need a prior theory
of areas and of limits and ultimately of calculus
to make this formula work this is a formula of
calculus another approach to the circumference or
to the length of the curve the two pi r formula
is to say well we can approximate the area by
inscribed and circumscribed polygons this was
Archimedes approach the length of the circle
whatever it is should be sandwiched between the
length of a regular polygon that you put inside
at the length of a regular polygon that you put
outside so again by taking some suitable limits
where you let the number of sides of the polygon
go to infinity then you get PI sandwiched between
two different values which are getting closer and
closer together so again with a suitable notion
of limit or calculus you can perhaps try to
derive this formula the approach via length of
curves is I think it's fair to say more subtle
than the approach to areas even though it may seem
intuitively easier after all we can simply think
in terms of a piece of string wrapped around the
circle then we can think about unraveling that
string and lying it out on a ruler and measuring
how long it is so intuitively the circumference of
a circle is something that we can easily grasp
however defining what we mean by the length of
a curve is somewhat problematic as the 17th and
18th century mathematicians realized so we need
a prior theory of lengths of curves to really get
at what going on in this situation here in either
case matter whether you take this approach or this
approach you are working typically in the context
of real numbers these limits the calculus ideas
involving some extension of the rational numbers
this theory of real numbers in either case so
we've seen already that there are some problems
with real numbers in terms of associating them
to infinite decimals later on we're also going to
see that even with Cauchy sequences or Dedekind
cuts real numbers are still problematic so the
problematic nature of real numbers underlies this
attempt and weakens this attempt to get at what PI
is in my earlier lectures in math foundations 87
and 88 I made the strong claim that modern pure
mathematics is logically weak and I also said
that one of the reasons is that there are these
areas of elementary mathematics where things are
assumed to be correct but not actually proven so
there's a gap between what goes on in the high
school level and what goes on at the university
level this is a very good example here we can see
exactly what I'm talking about the formulas area
equals PI R squared for a circle and circumference
equals to PI R are supposedly established in high
school or sometimes even in primary school
before any serious discussion or development
of real numbers limits or calculus these are high
school formulas that high school students learn
and then at the university level they are simply
assumed as given once you get to the university
level you no longer say okay let's have a look
at these formulas let's see exactly how these
things are properly derived and established know
they are just assumed to be relatively obvious
because you did that back in high school
very serious and obvious logic difficulty
with modern pure mathematics that extends its
fingers it has consequences in many directions
most books calculus books for example will blindly
assume these formulas without even any comment
however that's not universally true there are
some notable exceptions and I'd like to point
out to two very nice treatments of calculus which
really do make a average attempt to be logically
clear and correct one of them is the classic book
called simply calculus by Michael Spitak another
is a more modern recent book called a course in
calculus and real analysis by Gore pod and LeMay
so both of these books realize that formulas like
this cannot simply be taken for granted we need to
examine them carefully and try to justify them as
best we can however both books necessarily suffer
as do all books in modern analysis with weakness
about what exactly the real numbers are that's a
blemish which is not easily removed but in any
case if you're interested in the good course in
calculus these are very good books to have a look
at so let's have a brief look at the history of
Pi and various interesting formulas that have
arisen to calculate it whatever it actually is
the most naive and simple way of approaching the
concept of Pi is to relate the radius or perhaps
the diameter of a circle to the circumference so
if we take the diameter of a circle like this and
we imagine taking a string of that length and
wrapping it around the circle then we can wrap
it once and then twice and then three times if
we do it accurately we see that there's a little
bit left over so that the circumference is a
little bit more than three times the diameter
and that ratio is PI all right so circumference
equals either 2 PI R or pi times the diameter
and so pi is roughly 3 is a tried-and-true
simple-minded approximation to what pi is and
any careful analysis shows that that's not going
to be exactly true nevertheless we find references
to this value in Old Testament the ancient
Babylonians had a better approximation they
used 3 and 1/8 3.125 the Egyptians had 256 over 81
which is three point one six zero four and so on
Archimedes was the first one to seriously
investigate this in terms of giving a bound
on either side so a range of possible values for
pi to somewhere live inside and he showed that pi
has to be between three and ten seventy one two
three and one seventh and this value here is of
course also the same as 22 over 7 is a popular
approximation simple approximation to pi the
chinese it too to see in around 500 AD came up
with this value 3.1415926 I believe that was some
effort in the direction of Archimedes in terms
of inscribed and circumscribed polygons and then
we get the first sort of modern looking formula
by madhava in 1350 great Indian mathematician
living in Cochin in southern Indian Kerala we've
mentioned him before in their last video with a
more complicated formula here is a very simple
and elegant formula that he discovered pi over
4 is 1 minus 1/3 plus 1/5 minus 1/7 plus 1/9
and so on so the alternating differences are
the reciprocals of the odd numbers this was later
also rediscovered by Gregory and live Nets it's
often attributed to these people but really goes
to madhava and he realized that if you actually
want to compute values of Pi using this it's a
little bit slow because although you're going up
and down up and down you're slowly approximating
some value it does so rather slowly and so that
other formula that I gave you in the last video
is a more efficient formula that Madhava found
for calculating the digits of pi curiously the
first European formulas for pi were not in terms
of infinite series but rather in terms of infinite
products so the first formula goes to francois v8a
in 1593 who gave this expression for 2 over pi
it was root 2 over 2 times the square root of 2
plus square root of 2 all over 2 times the square
root of 2 plus square root of 2 plus square root
of 2 so we have nested square roots and we keep
going and what happens is that these numbers that
we're multiplying by get closer and closer to 1 so
we're multiplying by something always that's close
to 1 so that the product we're getting is not
diverging as much as you think it would be it's
actually converging towards some value according
to the standard theory so in fact in all these
formulas that I'm giving you here down we're going
to be using square roots and infinite series and
internet products in a quite Cavalier fashion so
we have not yet developed a proper theory of any
of these things ok so I'm just sort of iterating
the well-known formulas but actually establishing
these formulas and establishing their meanings is
quite a different story we'll talk about limits
and infinite series later on another famous
infinite just due to john wallis in 1650 which
is for the reciprocal PI over two and it's a much
nicer in some way it doesn't have any square roots
it's two over one times two over three times four
over three times 4/5 times six fifths times six
seven times eight sevens and I hope you can see
the pattern here the odd numbers are appearing
twice each except for the initial one and the even
numbers are appearing twice each also so the odd
numbers and the even number is staggered and as
we get further and further along here the numbers
that were multiplying by get closer and closer
to being one so the series stabilizes and then
we should mention that there are lots of integrals
so once the calculus had been developed there are
many integrals that can be written down for pi the
simplest one is probably this one pi over 4 equals
the integral from 0 to 1 of the square root of
1 minus x squared DX and that's representing the
fact that we can think of PI as being the area
of a circle of radius 1 and this is the calculus
formulation of the area of a quarter of a circle
then the great german mathematician Gauss Legendre
had a an iterative algorithm this is some kind of
new way of thinking about calculating pi in terms
of iterating some procedure starting off with some
initial values and then performing some operation
to get some new values and then performing it
again to get some new values and so on so Gauss
was very interested in the arithmetic mean and the
geometrical mean of two numbers so if you have two
numbers a and n BN then their sum divided by two
is called their arithmetic mean or the average
and the square root of their product is called
a geometrical mean so if we start off with two
numbers let's say a 0 equals 1 and B 0 equals
1 over root 2 then generate two new numbers by
taking their arithmetic 'el and their geometrical
mean and then we can keep doing that we can take
the arithmetic mean and the geometrical mean oh
the two numbers that we've got so we can generate
a whole sequence of pairs a 0 B 0 then a 1 B
1 and a 2 B 2 and so on and then also we can
do a similar kind of thing to two other numbers
starting with say T 0 equals 1/4 and u 0 equals
1 and then here are some recursive formulas that
define T n plus 1 in terms of TN and u n and u
n plus 1 in terms of U n so TN plus 1 equals TN
minus u n times a n the nth one over here minus
a n plus 1 over here all squared and u n plus
1 is simpler it's just 2 times u n ok so you
can generate these as many as you like and then
at some point if you want an approximation to
pi you use this formula here you take a n plus BN
all squared and you divide by 4 times T sub n and
you will get something which is an approximation
to pi it was quite a novel iterative algorithmic
procedure that encodes the idea of an algorithm
a recursive way of generating numbers the great
Isaac Newton also discovered some formulas for
pi and he was very interested in the circular
functions like sine X and cosine X and so on
and the inverse functions as well and he knew
that the sine of PI over 6 is equal to 1/2 well
known to all high school students these days who
have studied trigonometry and so PI over 6 is the
inverse sine of 1/2 and Newton had a formula for
the inverse sine function or the arc sine function
it was in terms of an infinite power series which
Newton liked and the formula is X plus 1 times X
cubed over 2 times 3 plus 1 times 3 times X to the
fifth over 2 times 4 times 5 plus 1 times 3 times
5 times X to the seventh over 2 times 4 times 6
times 7 and so on so the pattern is we have odd
powers of X and each of those odd powers of X has
a denominator which is the same as the exponent
and then apart from that we have the product of
the odd numbers up to that point and the product
of the even numbers up to that point so here we
have an X to the seventh divided by seven and
apart from that we have 1 times 3 times 5 times 2
times 4 times 6 so it's actually relatively easy
to remember it might be that this formula also
goes back to the mathematician around madhavi's
time and Kerala so Newton used this formula to
find pi - 15 digits and he has some famous quote
about he might be embarrassed to admit how much
time he spent doing this because at the time he
had nothing better to do he said then there are
some famous formulas do the two oiler that were
very surprising to the mathematical world and show
that pi can come up in rather surprising places
where you don't expect it to be appearing euler
was the first one to sum this rather natural
series 1 plus 1 over 2 squared plus 1 over 3
squared plus 1 over 4 squared and so on it was
well known that the series 1 plus 1/2 plus 1/3
plus 1/4 diverged so it grew indefinitely this
one is more amenable because the denominators
grow faster and so the numbers that we're adding
themselves are smaller as we keep going oiler
showed that this thing actually converges and
remarkably 2 pi squared over 6 and he also showed
a corresponding formula for the fourth power verse
reciprocals of the fourth powers they sum up to PI
to the fourth over 90 and in fact he could also
come up with a formula for the reciprocals of the
sixth powers and also the eighth powers and so on
and they involve higher even powers of Pi these
expressions ended up being important in number
theory because there's a famous function called
the zeta function and this is 8 of 2 and this is 8
of 4 basically because the exponent here is 2 and
the exponent here is 4 and curiously nobody really
knows a closed expression for zeta of 3 but we do
know that this is not a rational number due to
work of a parry relatively recently but the odd
sums of reciprocals are much harder to understand
than the even reciprocals here's an Associated
formula that's PI squared over 6 equals 3 times
the sum of 1 over N squared 2 n choose n this is
the binomial coefficient which is 2 n factorial
divided by n factorial times n factorial so the
denominators here are are bigger so this converges
a little bit faster we have to multiply by 3/2 to
compensate it's an interesting variate to Euler's
formula there are quite a few more formulas for pi
and if we move closer to the modern era we get a
whole range of fabulous new formulas and a lot of
them are inspired by the Indian genius ram anujan
Indian Clerk in Madras nowadays Chennai southern
India who was largely self-taught and somehow had
this miraculous understanding of infinite series
no doubt better than anybody since since Euler and
he came up with all kinds of remarkable formulas
that took mathematicians decades to figure
out whether these formulas were in fact true
and how to prove them and here's one of his famous
formulas it's a formula for one over pi and it's 2
root 2 over 9801 and then we're summing K equals
0 to infinity we're summing all these kinds of
terms so there's a 4 K factorial on the top 1103
+ 2 6 3 9 0 times K and on the bottom K factorial
to the 4th 396 to the 4 K so this is a remarkable
formula and in fact it was used in 1985 by a bill
Gosper to calculate a world record of 4 pi 17
times 10 to the 6 digits so 17 million digits of
pi were computed using this formula since then
we've gone a lot further and a formula that's
played an important role is that discovered by the
brothers David and Gregory chudnofsky relatively
recently in 1987 this is a ram anujan type formula
it looks quite similar but it's more complicated
there's some factorials here some factorials
powers another linear expression and something
to the 3k and we're getting something over pi
and this formula actually the one that's been
used for the current world record for the digits
of pi which in 2011 was given by a Yi and s Kondo
they computed 10 trillion digits of pi using this
formula so on their hard drive somewhere they have
10 trillion digits so I'd be 10 terabytes
of of digits of pi remarkable stuff really
another interesting kind of development that's
also relatively recent are things called spigot
algorithms which generate one digit of the
decimal expansion of Pi at a time and once
you've generated such a digit you in fact don't
use it in the subsequent derivation of further
digits all the previous formulas sort of use all
the digits that you've got to at some point to
get the next ones with the speed algorithm you're
just getting them sort of one at a time so I got
dripping faucet and this is a formula that due to
Simon proof 1995 a lovely formula it's actually
a formula that gives the hexadecimal expansion
of Pi so not a decimal number expansion but a
hexadecimal in terms of base 16 so you see the
16 here if you as one of our powers of 16 and
this is sort of giving you the digits of pi
and hexadecimal one at a time and it's this
expression 4 over 8 K plus 1 minus 2 over 8 K plus
4 minus 1 over 8 K plus 5 minus 1 over 8 K plus
6 very remarkable formula it's not known at this
point whether there is a similar kind of formula
that will spit out the you know the billionth
digit of Pi in the decimal form if you want
the billionth digit of pi in hexadecimal you can
use this you can calculate that billionth digit
without having calculated any of the previous ones
whether there's a corresponding formula for the
decimal expansion is not so clear so this game
of calculating pi something I've thought about
occasionally and I have my own little take on
a formula for pi which can't compete with these
fancy formulas in terms of efficiency or anything
but it might be a little bit novel although it's
also very possible that as well no ok but this was
described in my book divine proportions rational
Treaty Universal geometry on page 269 and it's a
formula for not pi but this expression PI squared
over 16 which is zero point six one six eight
five zero two seven five zero six eight and so
on and the the idea behind the formula is very
simple and goes back to our committee's idea of
approximating the circle with regular polygons
and calculating well not the area inside but the
rational trigonometry version of area which is
quadrille okay so I end up giving a recursive
description which is which is the following so
start off with a zero equals one quarter and
then define a sub n plus 1 in terms of a sub n by
this formula 2 to the 2n minus 1 minus 2 to the n
times the square root of 2 to the 2n minus 2 minus
a sub n that allows you to go from a zero to a one
and then from a 1 to a 2 and so on and here are
the various values that you get and a little bit
surprisingly what you end up getting you can sort
of see a pattern once you get to about this stage
here you can actually dispense with the recursion
you can just write down what the next one is so
at this stage here to go from here to here this
32 is multiplied by 4 the 16 is multiplied by 4
and this nested series of square roots of 2 which
is exactly the same kind of thing that appeared in
Viette days formula back in the 1500s it's simply
augmented by adding another one in the inside
position so instead of root 2 plus root 2 plus
root 2 we have root 2 plus root 2 plus root 2 plus
root 2 and that's how we just generate more and
more of these A's and these are become closer and
closer to PI squared over 16 so it's my own modest
little contribution to this although it's very
possibly not new and if you want to have a look at
this book you can look at the first chapter which
is available at wild ENCOM so my general claim is
that a lot of the formulas that I've been talking
about here are actually problematic when we look
carefully at them and the problematic aspect has
to do with the underlying theory of real numbers
which by claim in fact doesn't really exist so
all these so a lot of these formulas have to
be taken with a grain of salt or have to be
interpreted in an approximate kind of form in
a applied mathematics framework so one of the
claims that I made is that when you do mathematics
not in the right way it becomes computationally
weak and the examples become impoverished and
actually these real numbers the non rational
real numbers are a very good example of both of
those claims we've been talking a lot about PI
and that's because PI figure is very prominently
in the story of irrational numbers if you look at
all irrational numbers then discussion of these
irrational numbers is largely concentrated on on
discussions of pi and then to a lesser extent
E and the quadratic serve serves root 2 root 3
root 5 there are a few others a handful of others
that have received attention but dominantly most
of the attention goes to PI so in my opinion the
true meaning of many of the formulas that I've
stated in this lecture actually lie in the future
these are formulas that we write down but we don't
really know exactly what they mean nevertheless I
should probably spell out what PI is at least the
first few digits pi is 3.14159 two six five three
five eight nine seven nine three two three eight
four six two six four three three eight three two
seven nine five zero two eight eight four one nine
seven one six nine three nine nine three seven
five one zero and so on the problem of course
is with the and so on so as an infinite statement
this is actually ambiguous because of the unclear
aspect of what the and so on means we can try
to give it a meaning of course by choosing one
of the particular formulas that we happen to like
we could say let's use this particular algorithm
or this particular formula to define what we
mean by pi we can post that algorithm on our
wall and frame it but unfortunately we're doing
so in isolation we do not have a framework for
arithmetic with real numbers in which this fits
so for example computations become impoverished
as I've pointed out before if you want to add PI
and E the about the best you can do is to say well
it's pi plus e if you want to multiply pi times e
you say well it's pi e if you want to calculate pi
to the e well you write pi to the e the arithmetic
becomes largely vacuous the computations become
essentially without substance because there's this
weakness of what exactly we are talking about this
has not been resolved this is a major issue for
modern mathematics well what about computationally
now am I going to abandon all the formulas that
we have currently with PI and all the engineering
applications that use PI no not at all most of
those applications only require PI to a certain
number of decimal places typically to five or ten
decimal places even calculating the the radius of
the known universe to the size of an atom only
requires PI to about 50 decimal places so I'm
quite happy to believe in what we might call pi
sub 0 which we can define to be 3 it's a rational
number we can define PI sub 1 to be 3 point
1 PI sub 2 to be 3.14 PI sub 3 to be 3 point
1 4 1 and so on and so on meaning up to pi to the
ten trillion and 50y up to that particular number
because on Yi and condos hard drives somewhere
this number is actually written down explicitly
3.1415926 and then there are ten trillion and
fifty digits that they've computed and the last
ones happened to be six one one four two one so
one is the ten trillion and fiftieth decimal of
Pi and I think it's safe to say that we don't know
what pi is unless ye and Kondo have computed some
more since then this is already half a year ago
but up to this point we could be confident that
we know exactly what we're talking about and we
can think about pi as being actually a decimal
number independent of any algorithm so for
example we don't need to specify an algorithm
here we can just say that pi sub 3 is 3.14 1 and
we can use that in calculations and if we go down
to PI sub 10 or pi sub 20 then we've got enough
for any reasonable calculation that we want to
do but you might say well what about pi equals
PI infinity can't we think about this infinite
decimal going on and on and on forever well my
reaction to that is pretty skeptical no I can't
think about it and I suspect you can't either if
you're honest so in other words my your action
is something like well what about EB equal to
Easter Bunny well what about SC equals Santa
Claus this pie as an infinite decimal that goes
on and on and on forever is in my view roughly on
the same level of the Easter Bunny and Santa
Claus that's my position however it might be
that there's something out there called PI which
we have not quite understood yet so actually my
position is that probably in the future someone
will think route what this PI object really is
and when they do they will find out that it's not
properly a number in the same sense as 22 over 7
or minus 1/3 is a number this pi is actually
something much more interesting and much more
elaborate so in the meantime I'd like to call
this a meta number so this is now a new idea
that I'd like to put forward it's rather vague I
admit and speculative but I just want to point in
the new direction that we might possibly think
so I'd like to think of that PI itself is not
a number but if some kind of meta number and I
don't really know what that meta number really
means it's some more complicated object it's
something much bigger than an individual number
but I have in the back of my mind an analogy
that I'd like to share with you ok years ago
when the astronomers were thinking about model of
the universe they thought of the earth surrounded
by a celestial sphere and on this sphere the Stars
were embedded and the whole sphere went around the
earth and the planets and the Sun and the moon
so we wandered around on the celestial sphere
we now know of course that the true picture is
much more complicated than that in particular
there are certain objects which to the eye
look like a star but which turn out to be in
fact galaxies the galaxy itself is trillions and
trillions of stars so the story that we now have
that we now understand is much richer and more
complicated than the original point of view I
think a similar kind of transformation is going
to be taking place in the next hundred years or
so with regard to our understanding of the number
system we will start to appreciate that it's much
more complicated than what we've been thinking
about our model currently of the real numbers is
simplistic in the same way that the celestial
sphere model for the sky is simplistic it's a
lot more complicated than that in particular
as a rough analogy I want you to think about
rational numbers as being somewhat analogous
to the stars on the celestial sphere and meta
numbers as analogous to galaxies from a distance
without looking too carefully a meta number like
pi or maybe e looks a lot like a rational number
like 1/3 or 712 but you look more carefully and
you see that pi is actually much much more
complicated than 712 it's much richer than
712 it's a different kind of object fundamentally
so the relationship between rational numbers and
stars is roughly analogous to the relationship
of meta numbers like pi or e2 galaxies it's just
a mental orientation is nothing exact about this
this is just a way of thinking that suggests that
the future is going to give us a much richer idea
of what is the continuum fundamental problem what
exactly is the continuum and we are nowhere near
understanding what this thing really is how to
go from rational numbers beyond next time we're
going to start looking at real numbers as Koshi
sequences of rational numbers which also does
not work and we'll start by thinking about limits
of rational numbers I hope you'll join me for
that I'm Norman Wildberger thanks for listening